---
title: 'Abstraction to Reality: Why is Mathematics Such a Powerful Tool to Describe Nature?'
date: 2025-12-31
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

Something I wrote down for Helicase 2023. 

# Abstraction to Reality: Why is Mathematics Such a Powerful Tool to Describe Nature?


Since its inception, mathematics has been a strong catalyst for paradigm shifts in natural philosophy. Physics began around 600 B.C., when Pythagoras of Samos proclaimed an awesome vision. By studying the notes sounded by plucked strings, Pythagoras discovered that the human perception of harmony is connected to numerical ratios, which became the credo of the Pythagorean Brotherhood. The Pythagoreans, and several subsequent philosophers, believed that natural phenomena are innately mathematical, and mathematical aesthetics are not only superficial, but essential for the universe to work the way it does.

Newton’s arrival implied a long eclipse for the Pythagorean ideal of a mathematically sophisticated Creator. Newton’s classical treatment of mechanics attributed everything to dynamics. The great developments of nineteenth-century physics, epitomized in Maxwell’s equations of electrodynamics, brought many new phenomena within the scope of physics. Still, they did not alter this situation essentially. However, the advent of quantum mechanics reinforced the Pythagorean ideal among physicists and philosophers.

Emblematic of the new physics, and decisive historically, was Niels Bohr’s atomic model of 1913. The leitmotif of Bohr’s model is unmistakably mathematical. If anything, Bohr’s model conforms more closely to the ancient Pythagorean and Platonic ideal that *“God is a mathematician, and his every creation must be worthy of a mathematically inclined creator.”* Later work by Heisenberg and Schrödinger, which defined modern quantum mechanics, superseded Bohr’s model. This account of subatomic matter is less tangible than Bohr’s, but ultimately much richer. The mathematics describing the vibratory patterns that define the states of atoms in quantum mechanics is identical to the mathematics describing the resonance of musical instruments. The stable states of atoms correspond to pure tones. The big difference between Nature’s instruments and those of human construction is that Her designs depend not on craftsmanship refined by experience, but rather on the ruthlessly precise application of simple, mathematical rules.

To highlight this beautiful coherence between mathematics and natural phenomena, in 1960, the celebrated theoretical physicist Eugene Wigner published an essay, *“The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences.”* This was directly a result of his surprise at the connections he had discovered between quantum mechanics and the theory of group representations – a seemingly unrelated area of mathematics developed some 50 years earlier.

He could hardly have predicted what would occur 20 years later in the opposite direction: an essay by the celebrated mathematician Sir Michael Atiyah, titled *“The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Physics in Mathematics.”* In his essay, he argues that the toolbox of a physicist enables a practitioner such as Edward Witten to make significant contributions to pure mathematics as well. As is well known, Ed Witten won the Fields Medal in 1990, and continues to be the only professional physicist to have ever achieved such a feat.

So what makes mathematics and physics so interrelated? Several luminaries in various fields asked the same question, and it invoked many responses across a wide range of disciplines. The absurdity of the responses ranged from the famed Richard Hamming boldly stating that the ‘usefulness’ in question is nothing but an illusion, and humans usually create mathematics to suit the situation. On the other hand, Max Tegmark, a theoretical physicist, claimed that all of reality is just mathematics. All mathematicians do is discover (or invent? That’s a tale for another time) simpler mathematics to model our more complex and inherently mathematical universe. However, most of these responses were only ‘partial explanations’, and hence why mathematics and physics overlap still lacks a definite answer.

But let’s get back to what really got Wigner started on the question in the very first place — the birth of quantum mechanics. Wigner summarizes his article by saying that:

> *“The enormous usefulness of mathematics in the natural sciences is something bordering on the mysterious and that there is no rational explanation for it.”*

He concludes his paper with the same question with which he began:

> *“The miracle of the appropriateness of the language of mathematics for the formulation of the laws of physics is a wonderful gift which we neither understand nor deserve. We should be grateful for it and hope that it will remain valid in future research and that it will extend, for better or for worse, to our pleasure, even though perhaps also to our bafflement, to wide branches of learning.”*
