---
title: 'Does Quantum Mechanics Matter? The POV of A Condensed Matter Physicist'
date: 2023-06-31
permalink: /posts/2013/08/blog-post-2/
# tags:
#   - cool posts
#   - category1
#   - category2
---

Something I wrote down way back in my first year, when I was exploring around.


# Does Quantum Mechanics Matter: The POV of A Condensed Matter Physicist


Reductionism is the philosophy of explaining more complex phenomena with the aid of simpler or more elegant phenomena. According to the famous high-energy physicist Dr. Franck Wilczek:

> “Its [reductionism] form belies its content. Explaining things is augmentation, not reduction. I much prefer Newton’s phrase, *Analysis and Synthesis*, to describe the process of breaking problems or phenomena into simpler component parts (Analysis), and then building up from those parts (Synthesis).”

During the previous decades, the reductionist program had been profoundly successful, with the discovery of the electron, neutron, and proton; the theoretical predictions of the neutrino and the meson; the pion in cosmic rays; and many more. Yet, with the birth of solid state physics around 1940, the initial focus on one-electron properties of metals and semiconductors turned in the 1950s to the collective properties of matter through many-body theory. In due course, the field became known as **condensed matter physics**, reflecting the increasing focus on all matter, not just solids, and especially on collective phenomena.

In 1988, the famous condensed matter physicist, **Michael E. Fisher**, authored what must surely be a candidate for his least cited paper. Entitled *“Condensed Matter Physics: Does Quantum Mechanics Matter?”*, it poses an outrageous question. Fisher aimed to review the state of condensed matter physics as it stood on the 100th anniversary of the birth of Niels Bohr, with a special remit to comment on the overlap with Bohr’s ideas on the fundamentals of quantum mechanics.

The last decade had seen five major discoveries in condensed matter physics, ultimately garnering 5 Nobel Prizes, and each a splendid manifestation of quantum mechanics. Nevertheless, Fisher evidently did not regard his role as to provide a self-congratulatory pat on the back to condensed matter physics. Instead, he took it upon himself to explain his thoughts on:

> “... what condensed matter physics does, or should be doing, and what defines condensed matter physics, and thence to approach the question ‘Does quantum mechanics matter?’”

The viewpoint that he expounded was at the time still rather unorthodox in many areas of physics and science, in particular his perspective that:

> “The question of connecting the models with fundamental principles is not a very relevant issue or central enterprise.”

This would come as news to those in the physics community engaged in the reductionist program — including, to some extent, condensed matter physicists, but to a far greater extent, those working in high-energy physics. It quickly became clear that novel macroscopic phenomena transcended the additive properties of single degrees of freedom, and a renewed focus on collective properties was seen by many as the defining aspect of condensed matter physics. Indeed, Fisher is very clear where he stands on this point:

> “The basic problem which underlies the subject is to understand the many, varied manifestations of ordinary matter in its condensed states and to elucidate the ways in which the properties of the ‘units’ affect the overall, many-variable systems.”

Again, he is very explicit about the questions that animate the task of addressing the basic problem underlying condensed matter physics:

> “What are the states of matter? ... What is their nature? ... How do the various states transform into one another?”

As we will see, inextricably linked with these questions are two concepts that are subtle and took a long time to be appreciated: the notions of **“minimal models”** and different **“levels of description.”**

Fischer’s article, and the novel approaches he addressed there, was a masterly contribution that both recalled the extraordinary collision between physics and philosophy of a previous age, and heralded the dawn of a new era. The new approaches prescribed by Fischer can and have proven to be especially important for complex systems such as biology and turbulent fluid mechanics. Systems in such fields are more complex than those dealt with by physicists. In biology, there are many more levels of description than in physical systems, because of the intertwining of molecular sequence, three-dimensional structure, large-scale molecular motions, elasticity, gene expression, metabolism and energy flow, regulation, signaling, cell division, tissue mechanics, electrical activity, ..., all the way up to ecology and evolutionary processes.

Even **elementary particle physicists** came to the clear realization that their subject was about effective field theory, and not about fundamental physical law. Within a few years of Fisher’s article, this view was superseded by the general acceptance of effective field theory. The famous **Howard Georgi** describes this change in perspective in a remarkable comment that sounds the death knell for the fundamental viewpoint of elementary particle physics:

> “How does this process end? It is possible, I suppose, that at some very large energy scale ... the theory is simply renormalizable in the old sense. This seems unlikely ... It may even be possible that there is no end, simply more and more scales as one goes to higher and higher energy. Who knows? Who cares?”

So, is quantum mechanics truly an outdated tool for particle physicists? Maybe. But it is utterly clear that a **reductionist** approach to this discipline has been exhausted and it needs a change of perspective to move forward.
